


Missed first 15 mins




Darwin noted:

Vestigial traits:
Why did penguin wings lose ability to flight?

Why hasn't it disappeared completely?

The reason is:
They're being used for another function and not the original function.


Other examples:
Species of beetles (Darwin noted) the line in the middle.
You'll see tiny vestigial wings.
This is because the beetle was evolved from some insect that used to fly.

Same with pig fish - eye sockets but no eyes.
Molerats - 25 million years ago evolved from rodents from above ground.
For mammals - it's really important to have light which is why the molerats
didn't evolve the exactly same way as the fish (they still have small eyes).
But they're still  a vestigial trait.

Appendix - you have a 1 in 50 chance of getting appendicitis.
The appenix is used in most animals for digesting celluloise(?)
and we don't need that functionality.
People with small appendix have a higher chance of getting appendicitis.

Horses only have one toe/hoof- evolved from ancestors that had 4 digits.
Some horses are still born where the back toes are born longer than they should be.
These are examples of some vestigial traits.


What do these animals have in common?
Whales' vestigial limbs.
Whales - evolved from an animal(Pakicetus) moved from the land back into the ocean.
Over a short time (about 10 million years) evolved from 4 legged to someting
which lived compleltely in water.


Video of Pakicetus over 10 million years hind limbs disappearing,
nose starts from end of the snout (land animals) evolves backwards (better for water)
so they can take deeper breaths.
Almost all whales have vestiges of this evolutionary process.
1 in 500 whales you can notice these limbs protruding out of the side of a whale.

Final example - The coccyx
Tail bone. Some people have muscles attached to the bone- these are vestigial muscles
from the tail of ancestors. In human genesis you can see that a tail is grown 
and then disappears again.

Atavisms?
Genes which are switched off, sometimes turn on causing mutation
E.g. - Some babies are born with a remnant of a tail.

Birds have directions in their genome to make teeth.
If you give birds the essential protein -it's possible to get teeth.
This is because birds evolved from ancestors that had teeth.


Evidence from embryos-
Originally scientists thought sper was a miniature copy of a man - incorrect
it's the combination of genes from male and female that develop into embryo.


Fish->Salamander->Tortoise->etc
In the early stages the embryos look extremely similar.
All of them look like fish initially.
Darwin was very aware of this.


Von Baer's principles:
1) General features appear earlier than the specialised features
For example- all tetropods develop 4 limbs.
Specialized - Some develop scales, feathers, skin. They occur later in development.

2) Less general develop fro more general
For example- scales, feathers are developed from skin which develops first.


3) Higher animals go through what look like the earlier stages of the lower animals


Do von Baer's ideas make sense in the ligh of evolution?
check slides
The same tissue used to make gills are used to mak....(check slides)

3 questions

- Why does sequence of development mimic the order of our ancestors?
	They take existing structures and modify them

-- check slides They take existing structures and modify them

--- check slides


Main point is - evolution is tinkering and not makng major changes through time.


ONTOGENY RECAPITULATES PHYLOGENY.


Other examples:


Lanugo - hair in humans start being absorbed/shed
Baleen whale embryos - teeth are reabsorbed


Evidence from bad design-












































