Video - David Attenborough
Last class:
Evolution traits through vestigial traits
 
Appendix - why haven't we entirely lost the appendix?
We are probably at the beginning of the loss of these vestigial traits

We spoke about atavisms - traits that ancestors used to have appear spontaneously
. Children born with tails etc. 
Birds with teeth example from last class.

Also spoke about embryos and similarity between different lineages. They seem to
mimic the evolutionary path that the lineage has taken over time.
Amphibian embryo has phase where it seems like a reptile etc.
This makes sense because we all evolved from a common ancestor


Evidence of bad design:
Men are not particularly well designed in their genitalia
Urethra is right in front of the prostate
Prostate swells at an older age.
This is problem only in humans - this is bad design which is a consequence of
our ancestos.
Testicles migrate at 4-6 month old through the inguinal canal- this makes men vulneralble
to humans. This was designed because in ancestors, in fish etc sperm was kept inside
But in humans, sperm has to be cooler which is why we evolved to have a 'cooler' space.

In females, it would be better to birth through the abdomen, but ancestors birthed through the
pelvis.
There's a gap between fallopian tube for some reason. So egg can sometimes not enter the fallopian tube.

Flounder (check slides) - why did flounder evolve like this (swim on side) while skate evolved to swim on stomach? They evolve from ancestors that way...

Evidence of biogeography:
When Darwin was travelling in Andes, if you look at animals and plants on the East side of
Andes were very different from the West despite the fact that the enviroment seemed very similar
(to Darwin at least). On a larger scale, the environment of US and Africa are similar- but the types of animals over different continents is completely different.

There are cases of similar looking but genetically different animals/plants. Explain.
Cacti vs succulents. All succulents are found in Asia- doesn't say succulents cannot
grow in North and South America. 

Glossopteris - these plant fossils are found on all continents.
Darwin said that there were land bridges (between continents?). He also had other theories like transport by bird, floating seeds etc.

What Darwin was missing?
Continental splits/drifts which wasn't a theory until early 20th century.  This explains a lot
of things.

There are two major groups of mammals- true mammals and marsupials
In true mammals - all development happens in the womb (nourished through placenta etc)

BBC video- kangaroo birth. 


Why are nearly all of Australia's native mamals marsupial while placental(true) mammals in
other parts of the wolrd?


Why do placental mammals and marsupials look and act so much alike?


<not sure about this part>
How did marsupials and placental mammals end up in different places?
Slides / not sure
in pic 5, continents started separating
and in pic 6 ,
in pic 7 decline of dinosaurs

9 South america touches antartica forming a land bridge (marsupials were in SA)
10 true mammals took over the rest of the worls
11 Antartica froze over. So none of the marsupials there survived.
12
13 - 
</notsure>

Convergent evolution:
Coat colour in cold environments- all of them independently evolved white fur 
not that their ancestors had white fur.


Evidence from islands:
Oceanic islands are islands are formed from volcanic origins.
Continental islands - cut off from main land.

In oceanic islands - particular types of animals are missing.
There are very few reptiles in Galapagos islands.
And the animals on these have very particular sets of traits.
Galapagos tortoise - some of them had sweeter and darker meat than others.
But there were other key differences between different types of tortoises.
Even though oceanic islands are missing some key animals, but the ones
that exist are very diverse.


Hawaii has most species of honey creepers and more than half the species of fruit flies.
(Not sure why relevant)

Why are some animals off islands?
Why do islands have lots of ecologically diverse forms of islands?
Why do animals and plants resemble those of close mainland?

Apative radiations - check slides

Another video- Charles Darwin and Galapagos islands. "The islands that changed the world"





